[‚Üê Articles](README.md#articles)

# Best Practices Are Just Practices

In the first chapter of ["Toyota Kata: Managing People for Improvement,
Adaptiveness and Superior
Results"](https://www.amazon.com/Toyota-Kata-Managing-Improvement-Adaptiveness/dp/0071635238),
Mike Rother tells a story about a friend who observed "flow racks" being used
during a Toyota factory tour. What they are doesn't particularly matter, but
many people copied this technique for their own production systems. When the
friend toured the same factory again, they observed that "flow racks" were no
longer in use, and another technique was used instead. Frustrated, the friend
asked which technique was better, which was not a question that the Toyota hosts
understood. The cognitive dissonance demonstrated here is a result of one party
believing that something was a "best practice" and another party recognizing
that that practice was a specific countermeasure to a specific circumstance, and
that specific circumstances may be limited to specific moments in time.

The software development community is filled with assertions of "best
practices". Some of these are downright harmful, while others are merely
contextual. It would be ridiculous to consider any practice truly "best".
Different circumstances call for different countermeasures. Labeling any
practice "best" only has problematic effects.

If something is a "best practice", I should use it. It's the best, after all.
That means I won't find anything better, which means I don't have to look for
anything better. This flies in the face of the notion of continuous improvement
&mdash; something that works well today may be improved upon tomorrow.

Furthermore, if it is best, I don't need to examine whether or not it applies to
my situation, I just need to blindly follow the suggestion. Those who push or
cite best practices often (intentionally or not) want to convince you of
something without requiring or asking you to think for yourself. This can stop
learning and inquisitiveness in its tracks, but it is very tempting to take this
shortcut. Be warned, however, that this is adhering to orthodoxy, rather than
practicing engineering and continuous improvement.

We aren't actually going to get better unless we challenge the status quo. Best
practices are, at best, average practices. We can always improve. I'd suggest
taking a look at anything that your team considers a "best practice" or anything
that they hold dear, and asking, "What problem does this solve?" Then, see if
there are ways to eliminate that problem or less elaborate ways to address it.
You might be surprised.

[Comments](https://github.com/aaronjensen/software-development/discussions/2)

---

Copyright Aaron Jensen 2023-present
